Adding initial stub for WILDS WDL Library product page (#1258)
FredHutch/wiki: _datascience/wilds_wdl.md

---
title: WILDS WDL Library
last_modified_at: 2025-09-17
main_authors: tefirman, emjbishop
---

## What is the WILDS WDL Library?

The [**WILDS WDL Library**](https://github.com/getwilds/wilds-wdl-library) is a collection of workflow description language (WDL) scripts that provide reusable, well-tested bioinformatics tasks that can be combined into pipelines for research.

> 

Reviewer: > workflow description language (WDL) scripts that provide reusable, well-tested bioinformatics tasks that can be combined into pipelines for research.

You may want to use this space to describe in general how you test them. As a user you would want to know things like did they test them on real world data? What types of tests are these? LIke making sure the code runs? etc.

Author: @sitapriyamoorthi -- That's totally fair. I added a "Testing & Validation" section to emphasize the testing strategy and resulting reliability of the workflows. How does that look?

You can:

> - **Build workflows** from reusable, tested modules without starting from scratch

Reviewer: Describe what a module is. Especiall FH folks could potentially get confused between modules they load on a cluster versus WDL modules.

Author: Expanded the module-level description in the section beneath this.

> - **Execute workflows** on multiple platforms including [PROOF](/datascience/proof/), Cromwell, miniWDL, and Sprocket

Reviewer: I dont know if the WDL library facilitates execution of workflows. It gives you WDLs but its not a one stop shop you know?

Author: It's more about the confidence that they'll execute, especially across the different executors. Reworded this slightly but keeping the general sentiment.

- **Learn WDL best practices** through well-documented examples and vignettes

> 

Reviewer: You could maybe highlight reproducibility as an important asset.

## Library Organization

> ### **Modules (tool-specific)**

Reviewer: Would it be more appropriate to say Modules = task specific Cause you can have modules with more than one tool?

- Individual WDLs for popular bioinformatics tools (e.g. STAR, GATK) and common tasks
- Meant to be imported

### **Vignettes (combine multiple tools)**

- Short workflows combining 2-3 modules

> - Meant to serve as examples

Reviewer: Examples of what? Maybe you can give like and example of a module and then show example of a vignette. 

Again the term vignette is use elsewhere in bioinformatics, especially in R so make sure you define what a WDL Vignette is. I would strongly encourage you to either think of renaming Vignette to something else thats not conflicting or atleast call them WDL Vignettes to distinguis them from other Vignette terminology already used commonly.

Author: Expanded this vignette definition a bit. I understand that the "vignette" term is already being used elsewhere, but the purpose is similar enough to that of R vignettes, e.g. a short bit of code meant to illustrate the functionality of a package, but maybe I'm misrepresenting that. Definitely worth discussing later, but I think it'll do for now.

### **Workflows (publication-ready pipelines)**

- Complex workflows combining multiple modules and custom logic
- Meant to serve as real pipelines

> 

Reviewer: Would you say here multiple vignettes makeup a workflow? Again would consider calling this either a WILDS WDL Workflow because conceptually in WDL even what you describe here as a module is also a Workflow. 

Terminology is important!

## Getting Started

> Use pre-made vignettes and workflows or build your own. **Once you have a WDL you can run it several ways:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the WDL library you can start running your workflow. Start off by using pre-made vignettes and workflows to run a WDL workflow and analyze your data:**
```
Comment

You must actually help someone get started.

### Fred Hutch Users

You can use **[PROOF](/datascience/proof/)** to submit WDL workflows to the cluster through a user-friendly interface:

> 1. Ensure your input data are accessible via the cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Ensure you have access to data you want to analyze via the cluster
```

> 2. Navigate to [proof.fredhutch.org](https://proof.fredhutch.org)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Make sure you are either on the FH Network or connected via the VPN. Then navigate to [proof.fredhutch.org](https://proof.fredhutch.org)
```

3. Log in with your Fred Hutch credentials

> 4. Upload a WDL and inputs.json file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Upload a WDL and accompanying JSON files.
```

Author: Fixed in latest commit.

> 5. Submit and monitor your job through the dashboard

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Submit and monitor your job through the PROOF dashboard
```

Author: Fixed in latest commit.

### Everyone

You can run WDLs locally if you have a WDL executor and Docker/Apptainer installed:

   - Basic WDL executor options:
       - [miniWDL](https://miniwdl.readthedocs.io/en/latest/getting_started.html#install-miniwdl)
       - [sprocket](https://sprocket.bio/installation.html)
   - [Docker Desktop](https://www.docker.com/get-started/) for container execution

For example, you can run WILDS WDLs from the terminal using miniwdl like so:

```bash
# Clone the WILDS WDL repository
git clone https://github.com/getwilds/wilds-wdl-library.git
cd wilds-wdl-library

# Run a vignette (update inputs json as needed)
cd ../../vignettes/ww-sra-star
miniwdl run ww-sra-star.wdl -i inputs.json
```

### Importing into Your Workflows

You can import a WLDS WDL into your own WDL script:

```wdl
version 1.0

import "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/getwilds/wilds-wdl-library/refs/heads/main/modules/ww-sra/ww-sra.wdl" as sra_tasks

...
```

> >Note: Fred Hutch users must use `version 1.0` to run on PROOF

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>Note: Fred Hutch users must use WDL `version 1.0` to run on PROOF
```

Then we can use tasks from the imported WDL. Here we are hard coding the input instead of using an `inputs.json` file:

> 

Author: Great call, updated the example to get rid of hard-coding.

```wdl
...

workflow my_analysis {
  call sra_tasks.fastqdump { input: sra_id = "SRR12345678" }
}
```

## Available WDLs

See our [GitHub page](https://github.com/getwilds/wilds-wdl-library?tab=readme-ov-file#available-components) for the current list of WILDS WDLs.

Some popular tools we have modules for:
- BWA
- STAR
- GATK
- Samtools
- SRA toolkit

If there's a tool you'd like to see or a task you want written you can file an [issue](https://github.com/getwilds/wilds-wdl-library/issues) or make a [contribution](https://github.com/getwilds/wilds-wdl-library/blob/main/.github/CONTRIBUTING.md)

## Key Features of the WILDS WDL Library

### **Quality Assurance**

> - **Automated Testing**: All components tested on every update

Author: Expanded this bulletpoint a bit, not sure what else to say about it.

> - **Multi-Executor Support**: Compatible with Cromwell, miniWDL, and Sprocket

Author: No actually, a lot of WDL scripts with run just fine in Cromwell for example, but fail in Sprocket due to execution differences. There are a bunch of reasons for that, but it's actually non-trivial to create a script that works for all three engines.

> - **Real Data Validation**: Tested with authentic bioinformatics datasets

Author: Switched to "realistic"

### Learn More

- [WDL Best Practices Guide](https://getwilds.org/guide/)
- [WILDS Docker Library](https://github.com/getwilds/wilds-docker-library)
- [Contributing Guidelines](https://github.com/getwilds/wilds-wdl-library/blob/main/.github/CONTRIBUTING.md)

## Frequently Asked Questions

**Can I use these workflows on my own compute infrastructure?**

Yes! All workflows are designed to be portable and work with any WDL executor (Cromwell, miniWDL, Sprocket). Be sure you have one of these WDL executors and Docker or Apptainer installed.

**Do I need to install Docker containers locally?**

You need Docker installed but you do not need to pull the individual containers. The tasks do that automatically.

**How do I contribute a new module?**

Follow our [Contributing Guidelines](https://github.com/getwilds/wilds-wdl-library/blob/main/.github/CONTRIBUTING.md) and focus on high-utility bioinformatics tools with comprehensive tests.

**Are these workflows production-ready?**

Modules and vignettes are well-tested building blocks. Complete workflows in the `workflows/` directory are publication-ready pipelines.

**How do I get help with a specific workflow?**

> Contact the WILDS team at wilds@fredhutch.org or open an issue on [GitHub](https://github.com/getwilds/wilds-wdl-library/issues).

Author: Great call, added these resources to the "Contact Us" section in a previous commit.

## Release Notes

> ### September 18, 2024

Author: Great catch, fixed in latest commit.

### Everyone

You can run WDLs locally if you have a WDL executor and Docker/Apptainer installed:

   - Basic WDL executor options: [miniWDL](https://miniwdl.readthedocs.io/en/latest/getting_started.html#install-miniwdl), [sprocket](https://sprocket.bio/installation.html)
   - [Docker Desktop](https://www.docker.com/get-started/) for container execution

For example, you can run WILDS WDLs from the terminal using miniwdl like so:

```bash
# Clone the WILDS WDL repository
git clone https://github.com/getwilds/wilds-wdl-library.git
cd wilds-wdl-library

# Run a vignette (update inputs json as needed)
cd vignettes/ww-sra-star
miniwdl run ww-sra-star.wdl -i inputs.json
```

### Importing into Your Workflows

You can import a WILDS WDL into your own WDL script:

```
version 1.0

import "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/getwilds/wilds-wdl-library/refs/heads/main/modules/ww-sra/ww-sra.wdl" as sra_tasks

workflow my_analysis {
  input {
    String sra_id
  }
  call sra_tasks.fastqdump { input: sra_id = sra_id }
  output {
    File fastq = fastqdump.fastq
  }
}
```
>Note: Fred Hutch users must use WDL `version 1.0` to run on PROOF

> Then we can provide custom inputs using an `inputs.json` file:

Author: Good call, updated in the latest commit.

Docker will take care of pulling the necessary containers automatically when you run a workflow, so you'll need Docker installed but don't worry about pulling individual containers.

**How can I contribute to the library?**

We are very open to contributions from the Fred Hutch community and beyond! Our [Contributing Guidelines](https://github.com/getwilds/wilds-wdl-library/blob/main/.github/CONTRIBUTING.md) describe these processes in detail, but feel free to reach out to us at [wilds@fredhutch.org](mailto:wilds@fredhutch.org) if you have questions.

**Are these workflows production-ready?**

Yes! All components undergo rigorous testing:

- **Modules**: Automated unit tests run on every update using Cromwell, miniWDL, and Sprocket to ensure cross-platform compatibility. Each module is validated with authentic bioinformatics datasets.
- **Vignettes**: Integration tests verify that modules work together seamlessly. These are manually tested with real data to ensure practical usability.
- **Workflows**: Complete end-to-end workflows in the `workflows/` directory undergo comprehensive validation with realistic datasets and are suitable for research publications.

> All testing is tracked through our [continuous integration system](https://github.com/getwilds/wilds-wdl-library/actions).

Author: Updated in the latest commit, thanks @emjbishop !
